Hello, hello.
Hello, how are you?
I'm doing well.
So awesome to have you here on Talk Python and Talking Academics.
I didn't tell you before we hit record,
but I spent a long time at universities and I just love them.
They're such cool places and it's going to be really fun to get a look
inside how Python's being used there.
Yeah, thank you so much for having me.
And yes, I too love universities.
It's kind of like all the coolest parts of humanity just kind of intermixing in one place.
So, yeah, I'd love to kind of peel back the curtain on how.
Yeah.
So we're going to talk about how.
We're going to talk about how you and your colleagues use Python and data science inside of your neurology research lab.
But before we dive into that, let's just get a bit of background on yourself.
Who are you?
How do you get into Python?
All those things.
Yeah, absolutely.
So I'm Keelan Cooper. I'm a neuroscientist at the University of California, Irvine.
So Southern California, 15 minutes from the beach and an hour from the mountains.
But I'm originally from the middle of nowhere, Indiana.
And I started I started playing with computers and code when I was young, like middle school is just ripping apart computers and seeing what was in them and then trying to put them back together and feeling bad when they didn't work.
right after. And then the typical, you know, tweaking the software when you don't like what
it does until you make it work. And then probably my senior year of high school is when I started
teaching myself Python. And it was because we had to do some for some government class, actually.
Oh, wow. Okay. And we had to learn. We were learning about the stock market. And every day
you'd have to spend like 15 minutes going to like some stock website and like filling out your fake
stocks. And so I wrote a really small Python script that would just pull the data from the
website and populate like an Excel spreadsheet. And so every day the kids in the class were just
like going through and like spending 15, 20 minutes by hand writing it down. And I would just sit
there and wait. And so that was kind of the first time I was like, wow, this whole automation thing
is pretty sweet.
From there, Python just kind of caught the bug pretty early.
Python was definitely the way to go.
Yeah.
Was Python your first programming language?
I mean, the first programming language
was the Windows registry
and trying to undo all of the mistakes
in the operating system.
But it was my first one.
It's been a while.
Yeah.
It's been a while since I've been in the Windows registry,
but good old reg at it.
I switched to Linux pretty quick.
Are you still on Linux?
Mostly.
My desktops are all Linux.
My servers are obviously all Linux.
I like Mac for a laptop just because, you know, Linux has this thing where you tinker with it.
And so then any small task you want to do, you end up like rewriting some deep script in the operating system.
And like two hours later, you're like, what was that small thing I was trying to do again?
Yeah, exactly.
I got distracted.
I was rewriting something in there and off we go.
Yeah.
So Macs are nice because you still have all the same Unix-like properties that are great,
but you pay a price for reliability, but it's pretty hard.
You just sell a bit of your soul out, but boy, is that UI nice and those little menu
bar apps are handy.
You know, I was...
That's right.
I've been playing with running Ubuntu on my Mac M2 Pro,
which it runs great, but it's an ARM version of Linux.
Well, both really.
But boy, is there a limited supply of applications
for an ARM Linux distribution.
Let me tell you.
Just download the Debian package.
Yeah, just download the Debian package.
Did you just install it?
Like wrong platform, like again, over half.
But yeah, I think it will change as I think ARM's going to start to take over Windows a little bit as well.
And obviously the Mac world is basically transitioning.
So anyone who has a Mac, yeah.
I think it's Qualcomm that just kind of started hinting that they were going to try and really heavily compete with the M line of processors and have some good specs.
So yeah, it'll be good.
I have an M3.
It's pretty nice.
It is really nice.
Like I said, I like to run more stuff on it,
but it's still kind of Intel or x86 stuff
for Linux and Windows.
So it's a little hard to work with that,
but still super fun.
That's a long way to say it's a very long time slip
in a reg edit.
Personally, it sounds like you as well
being not naming Windows too much.
Yeah, yeah.
No, I, yeah, I'm so bad at Windows now.
Like when I'm helping people with Python or something else
and they show me their computer,
there's always that like 10 minute learning curve of like,
okay, how do I, how do I do anything basic on this machine?
Or even like the keyboard shortcuts you get so accustomed to
when people don't have any of those little things
that you're just like, how do I select everything?
Yes, that is it.
Like I did professional software development.
on Windows for a long, long time.
I even wrote a bunch of Windows apps.
It was great.
But going back and forth too quickly,
that or Linux,
like just the hotkeys,
I just get broken.
Not just on Windows.
Also, when I come back to Mac,
like I'm just completely out of sorts.
So yeah, it's fun.
All right, well, let's talk academics
and Python from probably an OS,
mostly agnostic perspective.
But yeah, just give us a sense of the kind of research you do.
What is your field?
What do you study?
Those kinds of things.
So people get a sense of where you're coming from as you talk about doing all these things.
Yeah.
So the core of my work is pure neuroscience.
So basic science.
What we do mainly in the lab is we take really tiny wires.
So they're like a fifth of the size of the human hair.
And now we're using something called silicon probes, which are, they're manufactured the same way that computer chips are manufactured on silicon.
Wow.
It's using photolithography.
And so you get a higher density that way.
Do you get like a bunch of little sensors on one attachment point or something?
Okay.
So we used to build these little drives.
I used to have one here, but I got rid of it.
Little drives by hand.
So you would just feed the wires in with forceps.
And so you'd get maybe 64 or 128 at most, depending on how much time you want to sit there and feed the wires in.
But now you can just get the manufactured.
You pay a lot more, but you get twice, three times the sites.
And the whole point is the more sites you have, the more neurons you can actually record from in the brain.
Yeah.
You're not just saying this part of the brain lit up, but you can have a much better picture.
the constituent part of your brain is the neuron. And so of the millions and billions of neurons,
depending on the species you're recording from, we can record maybe a few hundred of them. But
that's usually sufficient to actually, in the specific region you study, and I can talk about
that more, to discern some sort of information from it. So really the data type we really care
about is this tiny little electrical voltages that tell you what different neurons in the brain are
talking about. And so you put the wires in, you record the conversations of a bunch of neurons,
and particularly we're interested in two brain regions that are critical for memory, learning,
and decision making. And this is the hippocampus, which in humans is about the size of your pinky
and a few inches in from your ear, and the prefrontal cortex, which most people know about
behind your forehead for learning decision making and all those sorts of things yeah so that's the
core of my work is i'm in the lab doing the actual data collection and building equipment to
actually do that but once you have all of that data and the data keeps growing like most other fields
you got to do a lot of pre-processing which takes python you got to do a lot of post-processing which
takes a lot of python and also we do something called neural decoding so not only do we just
like say descriptively what are these these neurons doing but we can go one step further
and say what are what actual information are these cells representing um so in in the brain
we can kind of say um this is kind of the fundamental kind of um information transfer and
and how information is manipulated in the brain and how it ships information from the environment
into memory and how it uses that to make a decision all of those kinds of things we can
use their fancy modeling and statistics and more recently deep learning and those sorts of things
Yeah. Yeah. We'll have to come back to deep learning later. That'll be fun.
Yeah.
Given your background. So for this hardware, do you write the software that actually talks directly to the hardware?
Or is there something that just records it and you grab some sort of custom file format and run with it?
Yeah. More recently, it kind of depends on the lab.
So as time goes on, there's more and more companies that you can just buy off the shelf kind of recording platforms, mostly for the electrical engineering people.
It's kind of like an audio amplifier because you're recording at millivolts in the brain.
So you have to amplify it, write it to if you're plugged in with a wire, write it to the computer.
So all that takes software in various forms.
And then we do a lot of animal research.
the tasks that the animals do are pretty much all automated. But recently in the lab, we've kind of
had this resurgence of like developing kind of novel hardware and a lot of automation of behavior.
So I've kind of rewritten most of our entire behavioral stacks, which is a lot of just
some microcontroller programming, which not a lot of that's in Python. A lot of that's just kind of
like C++ and those sorts of things.
But we have cameras all over.
So I wrote this kind of like camera server
that streams all of the camera footage
from a bunch of automated boxes
to some like central server
that just collects all of that data.
So yeah, a lot of the behavioral stuff nowadays
we're just building in-house
to collect all of the behavioral data.
The EFIS stuff is now,
Especially because we're doing something called wireless recording.
So instead of just having a wire plugged into the head,
it just writes it to like an SD card or Bluetooth.
That's just kind of all on chip.
Yeah.
And so it's just whatever the microcontroller language of the chip needs.
That's wild.
I think it's surprising how much software and even hardware,
but definitely software is involved for something that doesn't sound like a software discipline,
right? You wouldn't think of what you guys are doing as inherently almost like a software team,
but there's a lot of software there. Absolutely. And it's growing. So it used to be like 10,
20 years ago, more biology, I'd say like more wet lab stuff, but 90% of what I do as kind of a
neurobiologist is really just engineering style things. Like I'm more recently designing PCBs and
I'm in the shop a lot, just like with saws and hammers and drills and like actually physically
building things. And obviously a lot of code. And the coding part is becoming bigger and bigger to
the point where in the field, I always say that the neuroscience is like about three decades behind
astrophysics um because all the problems that like neuroscientists like say we're facing now
as a field they have like three decades prior where um in in astrophysics they're like whoa
or neuroscience we're like what do we do with all this data this is we i mean i'm collecting 100
gigabytes an hour um if not more um like what do we do that is a lot asked yeah but relative to
like some of those big telescopes that are collecting like almost petabyte scale yeah yeah
I would say both ends of physics, like the very, very extreme ends of physics. So astrophysics, the very large and then particle physics. Right. It's CERN as well. They've got insane amounts of data. Yeah.
And that's what we're starting to see, I think, in neuroscience, too, is that kind of division of like, because the scale of data collection is so big, you're starting to need not just a single lab, but teams.
So we have a few institutes now that are just pumping out terabytes of data.
And so you start to see that division between the neuroscientists who are really in the lab, hands on with actual neural tissue or the recording device.
And the neuroscientists who are just take the data and analyze it and develop new models and statistical models.
And also theory, there's always a dearth of theory in neuroscience, but the computational modeling is certainly getting a lot bigger within the last few decades as well, where people's entire job is just how do we model some of these things in code?
Well, do you see, you probably run into different research groups, different teams that have different levels of sophistication from a software side.
And do you see like a productivity or a quality difference jump out from like the kind of work or the velocity of work that people are doing there?
Absolutely.
And it makes me almost like a, I mean, it's a huge range.
There are like very sophisticated labs.
And usually those are the labs that have kind of just a pure software person on the team or people who are very inclined towards software.
All the way to, and it makes me so sad when people are spending like weeks in a spreadsheet, just manually doing things by hand.
Yeah, I know.
You could do this in five minutes and buy a phone.
Pandas, you could just load it and take me.
And not only could you do it faster, you could do it without any errors.
Yeah, more of a lot.
Right.
None of those like, oh, I misread it and I shifted off by a cell or I typed in, you know, missed something, right?
Because it just reads what's there.
Yeah.
And so I think that a lot of graduate programs are starting to wake up to this fact that it's going to be almost impossible to do any science without some degree of proficiency in coding.
and and i think a lot of a lot of a lot of say grad students and postdocs and so on when they
actually sit down and try and analyze their data whether they're just in excel or they need to write
a little python script that's kind of their first introduction is oh i have this data i need to do
something with it i'm going to google exactly how do i read in this data or how do i do a t-test in
python or how do i plot something in matplotlib and that's kind of the level that they start
getting into out of necessity but the sophistication and the speed because that's they're usually just
teaching themselves that's most of academia it's just you have a problem spend a few days
googling and reading books until you find it and once it works you can kind of just leave it
you don't have to clean it up or anything right yeah okay which results in a lot of i mean
science the progress of science doesn't go away but the code is you know not robust and so that's
why you see things especially in other fields of like psychology and such like replication crises
and people have done meta-analysis of running the same software stack on like 12 different data sets
and you get different results.
And so you start to kind of see that, you know,
that shaky foundation is starting to bleed into the,
like you said, the reliability.
It's starting to have consequences,
not just it's more work or something.
Yeah, exactly.
Yeah.
Maybe we could start a bit by just talking about
maybe the history, you know,
diving into this a little bit more,
just the history of programming in neuroscience.
I wasn't in neuroscience in any way, but I worked with a bunch of cognitive scientists studying how people solve problems and thought about things at a lab for one of my first jobs.
And we studied all through eye tracking.
Yeah.
Like not the letter I, not the iPhone, but actual eyes.
And it was fascinating.
It was tons of data.
It was really cool.
And there were like you described a lot of people who would do sort of Excel stuff and they would take the data and they'd process it.
over time, we just started to automate these things. And their first thought was,
you're programming me out of a job. I'm like, no, no, no. This is the crappy part of your job.
You're supposed to analyze the results and think about it and plan new stuff. And now you can just
focus on that. And as the software got better, we just tackled bigger problems. So maybe give us
a bit of a history of on your side yeah yeah um so i love the cognitive science part that's
my my more background is cognitive science as my undergrad and grew up in science in a cognitive
science department while also doing some wet lab neuroscience stuff so it's fun yeah absolutely
did you start out with like matlab and that kind of stuff is that where they
they told you you need to be exactly yeah um so a lot of um so so neuroscience has certainly had
at least our branch of neuroscience just because by the nature of um recording voltages and you
need to write to a computer so there has been kind of a long history of um for as long as there's been
even like punch card computers um people have kind of read in the data into the computer and done
you know their statistics on that rather than something else um i'm just i'm actually recently
writing a kind of a review article on kind of the history of data science and neuroscience
and i loved this paper it was from um 1938 um and they took an eeg spectrum um and so eeg
is just the continuous time series of brain voltage. So you're not in the brain recording.
And this is, I think, from humans. And they took something called the Fourier transform, which
that might not be as up to speed with that is you basically just take some oscillating signal
and you break it down into its constituent parts. And most of you have seen it before. If you've
ever seen like an audio spectrogram, that's kind of the most notable visualization where you can
kind of see the high frequencies and basically it pulls the frequencies out of the exactly yeah
but the way they did this um this is 1938 there's no computers so they actually had a um mechanical
device where they would just take this eg trace that was on tape and they would feed it into this
like mechanical machine um and it would basically read kind of this black line on the tape and so as
would crank the tape around this machine depending on kind of the frequency that the line went
up and down that would read out the four-year transform so it was mechanical wow like a lot
of those cool devices back in the older days yeah that's impressive um now you can get that
same thing with in matlab you just type fft parentheses parentheses put your data in the
middle and you get the same thing in microseconds. But neuroscience, at least my field, has kind of
always had this kind of serendipitous relationship with computing generally, coding generally.
And a lot of the code, I think, earlier on was kind of was Fortran-ish and then it moved towards
MATLAB. And MATLAB's kind of had its stake in the ground for a long time, just because that was the
first kind of software that you could really do array manipulations on well and it was kind of a
higher level than some of the lower level programming yeah so a lot of the older labs have
you know their entire code base and stack and analysis software in matlab and so it's only
been within maybe five to six seven years um probably a bit longer 10 years that you've really
seen Python start to supplant Matlab as kind of the de facto programming language in labs,
just because of the cost of trying to transfer everything over. And despite the fact that
Matlab isn't open source and it's extremely expensive, most universities have licenses.
And so that kind of facilitates- It's prepaid.
Yeah. In a sense. Yeah. But it is still pretty expensive.
Especially if you get those little toolboxes, like Wavelet decomposition toolbox,
2,000 bucks instead of a pip install, you know?
Yeah.
And again, we do a lot of signal processing,
and so that's exactly the place you want to be.
And like MATLAB usually controls,
because it has pretty good control over like external hardware,
you can run like your behavior, your task kind of in MATLAB codes.
You can kind of do everything in one language
as you would like to do in Python.
But it's starting to kind of go away,
And I think a lot of that is just because the allure of Python, which is so many tools,
and because it's probably a lot easier to learn for most people than MATLAB.
We're kind of starting to see that switch now that there's kind of more to offer, I'd say,
a lot of scientists than MATLAB.
Yeah, you said 10, 12 years ago.
Yeah, the difference in the external packages on PyPI you can get,
And especially the ones for data science have just exploded.
The choices and the stuff that's out there, it's pretty diverse.
That's pretty crazy.
The only other one that I think is still in pretty strong competition with Python from the perspective of,
we collaborate a lot with like mathematicians and statisticians.
And R is their usual favorite just because statistics,
Like all the best statistical packages are still pretty much in R.
And so that's where a lot of people live.
GG plots, pretty good.
Yeah, that's interesting.
It's really focused and it's really good at what it does.
And one of the things that I think is worth just considering,
if somebody comes, let's say a brand new first year grad student
comes into the lab and you're like, all right,
what's your programming experience like well programmed the clock and the vcr like okay
we have to start you somewhere or something right and uh
you could teach them something really specific like matlab or or something along those lines
but if they learn something like julia not like julie like uh like python not julia maybe maybe
even not um not really are but ours closer somewhat is they learn not just a skill for the lab but
it's kind of almost any software job is potentially within reach with a little bit of
you know learning about that area right like it if you know python you say i want a job
there's a massive set of options out there if you say i know um matlab or even julia
It's like, okay, well, here's the few labs and the few research areas and the real, I just think it's something that.
A lot of engineering firms.
Yeah, yeah.
I'm just thinking that like a lot of academic folks should consider what happens if the student doesn't necessarily become a professor.
You know what I mean?
Which actually is a lot of the time, right?
Or a professional researcher of some sort.
And that's a really awesome skill to have on top of your degree.
So I think that's just a big win for it.
I'm happy to see that.
Yeah.
And that literal situation just happened where a statistician that we were collaborating
pretty closely with graduated, brilliant guy, and got a job at Microsoft.
And so we were in a meeting after he was there.
And they were like, what's some advice that you have now that you've been in industry for
a while?
He's like, stop using R. Learn Python, because everyone here uses Python.
And it took me a few months to kind of switch from the R worldview of, you know, caret hyphen to equals.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
To actually to work and collaborate with everyone, because everyone's just using Python.
Yeah, very interesting.
From his perspective, and I'm sure it's not unique.
No, I'm sure that it's not either.
i think yeah i just think it's it's not like a religious war it's not like oh i think python
is absolutely better you should just not use other stuff i just think it's uh preparing people for
for stuff beyond school it's a pretty interesting angle to take yeah yeah and it's not like you can't
learn other things i think it's really good to learn other things especially ones that yeah are
complementary where r can be complementary especially now that they have a lot of the like
subsystem
packages.
When I get R code, I usually just write
a subprocess. I did this recently.
I just wrote a subprocess line to call the R
script. I was too lazy to
rewrite it.
But there's other
like, I don't know, Rust is probably
a good one to probably try and branch out.
Or lower level languages like C++
if you need
for what you're doing.
It sounds like you guys do for
talking to hardware and stuff like that yeah yeah occasionally a lot of things python can't do
yeah for sure yeah break break out some micro python when you got to get your micro controllers
and stuff um so another thing that's i don't know how it's received i know it took a while to kind
of really catch on and i think the thing that just broke the final barriers uh for open source being
adopted in at least in business was uh data uh the ai stuff and the data science stuff people are
like oh we can't use this open source stuff we got to have a sla and some company we can sue if our
code doesn't work right or you know whatever right something crazy like that and they're like but you
understand all the ai in all the data science we have to use this open source stuff like all right
fine. What's the open source story for you guys? Yeah. So, I mean, academia is probably championed
open source for a really long time just because, I mean, open source back, I mean, even when I first
started was just if you read a paper and someone has some new fancy analysis, before it became a
bigger push by like funding agencies to like actually post it to GitHub or some repository.
I mean, you could just email people and be like, hey, I saw your paper.
I want that script.
And they would just send you a MATLAB file.
And it would be, you know, just whatever they had written, but it was in MATLAB.
And you'd have to kind of tear it apart yourself.
And there's little to no documentation.
You'd be lucky if there's comments and it's, you know, spaghetti code.
But, you know, you figure that out and you kind of work backwards and deconstruct it.
And eventually you kind of have their code.
So that kind of ethos of just, you know, scientists are really good.
by and large of just sharing information and helping people out.
If you have a question, just ask.
It's kind of always been there.
At least in our field, it's not as competitive as some other ones
where you're just kind of like racing to get the next project out.
It happens, but rarely.
But now a lot of funding agencies and just in general,
people are just excited about, you know, when you publish a paper,
you put a GitHub link in the bottom of the paper,
And then that links to the repository.
And yeah, maybe it's not been updated in a while,
but the code's there and you can just take it and grab it.
For the reproducibility.
How about using other things?
Is there, there's SciPy.
I know for astronomy, there's AstroPy.
Is there a NeuroPy?
There's starting to be.
So it's really still more analysis dependent
and pre-process dependent.
So there's kind of this,
It's still the early days where there's probably too many formats just because no one can agree on what's the best one.
So like even a lot of the data formats are written kind of in Python to take whatever data you have and reformat it to something shareable.
There's five or six of them floating around.
There's probably two that are still duking it out to see which one will be the best.
And probably five years from now, there's going to be a better one.
So data formats, certainly there's kind of this, there's a few that are neck and neck.
Analysis pipelines, a lot of those are still done in-house, but they're starting to be a lot more toolkits and frameworks and packages.
There's some really good ones that have more documentation written.
They're on the PyPy repositories, so you can just pip install them and you have them.
The computational neuroscience people are great at this.
So all the neural simulation software, that is all really well documented, really well written.
A lot of good example code and tutorials and so on.
So yeah, we're starting to see kind of this more robust kind of ecosystem where you can just kind of pull things.
It still just kind of varies.
there's probably still not one go-to place other than the standard data science
toolkits. Right. Right. Using the pandas and so on. Yeah.
NumPy map, hotlib, pandas, scikit learn through doing deep learning,
PyTorch or TensorFlow.
All of those still apply to any data science stack. Yeah, of course.
What's, what's your day-to-day stack look like if you're sitting down to do some
analysis?
Yeah, so like I said, the standard, I have a VS Code kind of like autocomplete where I just write import in, and it just numpy, matplotlib, pandas.
Then I usually delete pandas because unless I have a CSV file, I'm not using it.
So numpy, matplotlib, I can probably do 75% of the things I want to do.
learn in SciPy. Obviously, if I'm doing any stats with those things, those libraries I might go to.
And then over the last few years, I kind of just have my own, just because you catch yourself
writing the same functions over and over and over again. And so just started building my kind of
internal framework of just things I know I need. So if I'm working with LFP data, I have all my
filters there. If I have spike data, I have all my spikes there. We do a lot of decoding, so
developing like deep learning algorithms to decode neural data.
All of those are kind of listed there.
So yeah.
And I started to understand my friends that work in,
in Silicon Valley when they're like, Oh, I'm on internal tools team,
internal tools team. And they don't talk about it.
Like they don't make anything. Come on, man.
Yeah. And then like, I started realizing like, dude,
internal tools make the difference between like solving a problem in 10 minutes
or solving it in an hour where I can just sit down
and have everything automated to come up.
So yeah, the standard data science stack
I use pretty frequently.
Hardware stack, I mean, so VS Code,
I just recently switched to
just because everyone was talking about it
from like Sublime or I usually just edit it in a terminal.
And I was like, oh, I'll try it out.
Everyone's talking about it.
And it's one of the good things Microsoft has done.
It's pretty sweet.
Yeah, that's pretty sweet.
So that's pretty nice.
Okay.
And when you do the VS Code stuff,
are you just writing straight Python scripts
or are you doing VS Code on top of notebooks?
Yeah, so Jupyter's been great.
It has that kind of text view of a notebook type of thing, I think.
Yeah, I used to use exclusively Python scripts,
so just the.py,
and then started seeing how great Jupyter was.
And so then you start doing everything in Jupyter,
and then you start to have all these convoluted notebooks
and notebook v1 through 7.
So then you realize that you've got to find a balance
between, you know, notebooks are great for presentation
and for quickly testing,
but the sooner you can get it into a class structure
or package or something.
Sort of productized version of it,
you wanted to get it down into Python code
a lot of times probably.
Exactly, yeah.
Yeah, you're like, all right.
Like your internal tools you talked about.
You're like, all right, this is the library
you just call stuff, right?
That just belongs more as a package and not a...
Exactly, yeah, yeah, yeah.
So the sooner you can kind of condense,
pull the code out of the notebook
and just leave notebooks for presentation,
it's probably the best.
Yeah.
It's a lot of pipelines.
So it's a lot of pre-processing pipelines.
So you don't want, you know,
50 cells of just moving data around.
Preparing, yeah.
Yeah.
So you talked about having quite a bit of data.
some of that being image based sounds like a lot of work do you have like a big compute cluster
do you just have like a an ultra an m3 ultra or whatever that's not even out yet that's m2s but
do you have just a big machine or do you guys do cloud stuff what's compute look like yeah so it
depends depends on what i'm doing what i need most things let's be honest i could probably just use
macbook or i have a my own kind of my desktop computer is really a super micro server um just
just runs Linux um but then you know like if we're doing deep learning you need gpus and so we have
we have a nice set of gpus we can pull okay yeah do you do your own training on llms and other
deep learning things yeah um the only lm training for fun but yeah yeah and so all the deep learning
stuff we have to train kind of in-house on our particular data um so that's you know
all gpus for that um a lot of the statistics we do are like permutations so you need to kind of
like parallelize them out into cpus so then i'll pull like a cpu cluster we have if i need it
but also I realized too sorry does UC Irvine have like a big compute resource a few yeah
they have a campus wide one that you can get on and there's a few independent ones that I have
access to so GPU is kind of in a different place than CPUs are so I can just kind of pick and
choose and then I have a few servers in the lab that I've just kind of put together that all my
camera stuff, all the, all my behavior, I kind of wrote it. So it's cloud-based. So I can kind of
just pull up my phone and look at the videos of what animals are doing and stuff. All that runs
on just a server in the lab. So yeah, it's, it's, the compute is there when you need it. And I think
as I've matured, I've kind of learned, you know, when to use what compute when, and when it's worth
taking the extra time to use it when you don't need to.
And also when a lot of the times you don't even need it.
So I know a lot of people when I see their code
and they complain that it takes like an hour to run.
I mean, just using multiprocessing in Python,
that in and of itself is enough to not need to use a cluster.
They're just using a single thread for their analysis.
Right, for sure.
or just a bad programming patterns, design patterns.
Like you're looping over the thing in the pandas data frame
instead of doing vector operations in the pandas data frame.
Like that kind of stuff, right?
- A hundred percent, yeah.
I mean, that was one of the first things that I usually teach.
I have this little example script that shows that like,
why is it better to pre-allocate array
rather than to just, you know, append to the bottom.
- Yeah.
- And it's like these things
that we kind of take for granted now,
you know it's not intuitive unless you know you learn it the hard way but it sticks in your mind
once you learn it yeah yeah how do you go about the issue it's like people just take it for granted
yeah for sure like why didn't you know that how do you how do you onboard new people if you you
know get new grad students or people contribute other contributors yeah it just kind of depends on
the lab uh every lab kind of has their own structure of um just kind of this hierarchy
of expertise where like I started as an undergrad and I just volunteered in a lab at a different
university um and just volunteered my time eventually could get paid um just wanted to
spend time in the lab and you could um all the way to grad students who were there to get a PhD and
have more more kind of autonomy over their projects a postdoc who has a PhD and five to
eight years of experience and so it can pretty work well then there's like staff scientists or
even a lot of labs now are hiring just pure engineers or pure software people okay who need
to because there's such a need for that and so yeah it really just depends on the lab specific
situation and what their focus is on and what they need and those sorts of things cool i guess if you
have a good nsf grant you got some extra money it might money might be money well spent to hire
some student who has good programming skills right absolutely yeah yeah
one second no worries
all right let's see uh you talked about the
you talked about the video stuff that you're doing in the streaming video
like do you actually do analysis on that and or is it just for you to go back and look at
oh yeah yeah um we do analysis on that there's actually a pretty cool um deep learning package
out now we didn't write it another lab did um where you just give it the video frame and it can
automatically segment kind of if it's an animal right so like where their paws are or where their
like nose is looking or okay in some cases people have like you're talking about eye tracking they
do eye tracking in like mice now they do eye tracking on mice that was hard on humans in the
90s yeah there's a lot of vr so they put kind of mice in this like vr system um oh wow and they can
like see where their little mouse pupil is looking on like yeah and do they show them different
scenarios and they can detect that and they react to it oh absolutely yeah yeah wow okay
yeah incredible um so yeah and a lot of stuff um at least in our field the nobel prize was awarded
for um you stick some electrodes in the hippocampus part of your brain that's important for learning
and memory and then you have the animal kind of run around some environment um and then you take
some video data kind of where they were running the environment and if you were only looking at
the brain data you can predict to like 90 some percent accuracy the location of the animal so
you can show there's kind of this correspondence that inside the brain is a map of kind of the
environment um our stuff we're taking that um a little one step further that says this map is not
just for space it's for non-spatial and other things too um that there's this kind of network of
of information in the brain that the animal can kind of like navigate through,
even if they're just standing still, but thinking about some sort of problem.
But we use video data to, you know,
validate what the animal's doing or, you know, check which, what,
what kind of tasks they're doing and so on and so forth.
So yeah,
a lot of multimodal heterogeneous data that each needs its own funky
pre-processing. And depending on the task at hand,
you writing something new to ask that question.
Amazing.
So is that OpenCV?
My stuff is, yeah.
Yeah.
My stuff is OpenCV.
Streamed over sockets and some Django webpage.
It's fun.
It's cool to build.
Yeah.
That sounds really cool.
Yeah, absolutely.
So what kind of questions are you answering with the video?
Yeah.
Or is it just to correlate back with the time series of what you're measuring in the brain?
So one thing I'm looking at is, so like I said, the Nobel Prize was for the spatial map.
We're doing this non-spatial stuff.
And so we kind of do both in the lab where we have an animal kind of run around and then
we have an animal just kind of sit still and do some sort of mental task.
In our case, it's a, they have to memorize a sequence of odors.
And if the sequence gets shuffled, they, they make a different choice.
And so we're basically showing how does the brain work for the spatial part versus the non-spatial part?
What's similar about these two things? What's different about these things?
And we show that one of our recent papers was that the brain uses a lot of the similar mechanisms to navigate space as it does to navigate this kind of non-spatial odor task.
We also showed that there's this mechanism that the brain uses to take kind of discrete memories and link them together into some couldn't hear a whole.
Best case being like this talk, we've been talking back and forth for 30 some minutes now.
And inside there's kind of chunks of the conversation.
So if tomorrow someone was to ask you, what did you and that neuroscience guy talk about on your podcast, you would kind of rattle off this story of, oh, we talked about history of Python and this and this and this, right?
This, this, and this are each kind of discrete memories that in your brain you kind of lock together.
Right, okay.
You could use them, make decisions about them, and so on and so forth.
Think about it as a whole, not just the little ideas, every little idea, but like just the big concept of it, right?
Exactly. Yeah. And it's a fundamental thing that the brain does.
Like people say humans are storytellers and your life is kind of the sequence of events of stories.
And so you use that every single day and across a bunch of diseases.
That's one of the first things to actually be impaired, whether it's addiction or schizophrenia or Alzheimer's,
that kind of ability to link things in time and link them well and make
decisions about them starts to get in there.
Yeah. And that's not great when that happens, but that is what happens, right?
Absolutely. Yeah.
So I guess what are some of the,
what are some of the software engineering practices for lack of a better word
that you would recommend that maybe other grad students,
professors who are feeling like they're not,
they don't have their software game fully together,
pay attention to it.
And maybe what should they ignore, right?
Like, should they pay attention to like source control
and get up?
Should they have unit tests or, you know,
what should they pay attention to or not?
First off, no one writes tests.
That is just only the very few, very well put together.
and usually people who just came from industry write tests.
Sure.
Which is an issue.
But yeah, first off, just learn Python.
I've said that hundreds of times,
and I'm preaching to the choir in this audience.
You are, for sure.
Learn Python.
Honestly, there's not much better you could learn now.
And two, it's quintessential automation stuff.
So it's really just think about the things that you're doing,
like the spreadsheets or the simple things.
And really just ask yourself,
if you find yourself doing any repetitive tasks,
that's a software problem.
And those are the things to kind of look at first.
And so you have your text editor in one window,
Google in the other and stack overflow your way to learning. And so the way people, I think,
really do kind of teach themselves Python is probably the best way to learn. But nevertheless,
I think there is a real need for, and again, we're starting to see more of it, just formal education,
even if it's just a course. Our program is really great that they started to teach a Python course
just because the students requested it because they know how important it was.
Like a Python for neuroscience?
Exactly.
Yeah.
Okay.
I mean, you just work your way through if statements for loops, you know, data types.
But you probably also, I'm just guessing you get a chance to work with some of these external libraries that are relevant to studies they're doing, right?
Rather than, here's an example of stock market data.
You're like, great.
I'm not a trader.
I don't want to be a programmer.
Why am I here?
You know?
Yeah, it's really relevant.
And I think it's just kind of seeing like, oh, yeah, I would do that this way, but this is so much easier if I use Python.
And I can use it in Python.
And just seeing that, oh, it's not as bad as, you know, the mountain looks a lot higher when you're at the base than the summit.
So it does just kind of, you know, seeing it done once is usually enough to kind of tell people it's not as bad as you originally think.
Yeah, I feel like maybe I saw it this way.
I certainly know a lot of other people see it this way.
I mean, when I was younger, but a lot of people see it this way as well.
Is that like, you got to be crazy smart to do programming.
It's really challenging.
It's, you know, kind of one of those things that only a few people can do.
And then you get into it and you're like, oh, it's, it's not a few really huge steps
and things you've got to solve.
It's like a thousand small steps.
And each one of the little small steps, you're like, that was actually easy.
That's no big deal.
What's the next step?
and you get to the end, you're like, where was the big step?
Where was it really hard, right?
Yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
Do you have some experience where people in the department
or people that worked with you are like,
I'm not a programmer.
I don't want to do this stuff.
Then they kind of got into it and really found out
that programming was something they really liked.
Any converts out there?
Yeah, I would say so.
Yeah, I think so.
I think it's I mean I think there's kind of two kinds of people there's people who program just
because you know what is it the programming is an art book or whatever like they love it just for
the sake of like loving right like and I'm probably closer to those kind of people right like I just
think it's the coolest thing like academically but then there's the people who just kind of see it as
It's a tool like anything else.
And so you could be an expert in a drill, or you could just know to pick up a drill.
And I think that's kind of the majority of people, is that it's just another tool in their toolkit, especially for a scientist, just to answer the question that you're trying to answer.
And I would even flip the reverse where there's been some times where I've maybe even used Python too much in the sense that like I made a problem more.
Because it's like the automation dilemma, right?
Do I spend an hour automating this when I could do it in 10 minutes?
You got to do it a lot of times and all of a sudden the hour is worth it.
But if it turns out, I might need this a year from now.
So I might as well just write the script, whereas I could just do it.
That's pretty standard.
standard problems we all run into in programming. It's like, I'll write some code to do that. Or
I could just be done with it for sure. All right. I think we've got time for a couple more topics.
One thing that I think might be fun to talk about is publishing papers, right? Obviously,
if you're in academics, especially in labs, you got to publish papers. Do you use notebooks
and stuff like that for your papers?
Or is that just kind of separate?
Yeah, like I said, notebooks are great for presentation.
So yeah, I use notebooks kind of for development
just because you can quickly run code
and go back up and move things around.
And so I kind of like that ability to kind of just,
you know, a stream of consciousness write code
until you kind of like see how it's kind of working,
the prototype, and then refactor out into.
an actual.py document or a package or something else.
So that's kind of been my workflow and it works pretty well.
But then when you actually have the code and it works and it's robust,
you actually want to put, there's a lot of figures that's usually the main thing.
So you kind of put all of that, here's the data, here's the pre-processing,
here's the figure one, here's figure two, figure three in the notebook,
just so it's reproducible and other people can download it
and rerun your code and that sort of thing.
So I think that's slowly becoming kind of the standard approach
for those labs that use Python and they share their code openly.
That's kind of how they do it.
Anything like executable books or any of those things
that kind of produce printable output out of the notebooks?
Like publish a little output out of the notebooks?
Yeah, so not a lot.
But there's one of the journals, it's called eLife.
It's kind of, it's trying to like push the boundaries of what it means to publish a scientific paper.
And so they kind of have, because most papers are really just on the web nowadays,
the journals aren't really physical journals as much anymore.
They kind of have like papers as executable code where you can like plot the figure in the browser.
and kind of run through the notebook.
As an experiment, it's pretty cool to kind of see these new alternative ways
to still convey the same findings, but you can play with it.
You can kind of see how that goes.
So the methods are kind of implicit in the output.
What's the name of the journal?
That's eLife, yeah.
eLife, okay.
Cool.
Yeah, you'd probably, I suppose, need some way to capture the data output because you might not have access to the compute to recompute it.
Somehow it's got to sort of be a static version, but that sounds really cool.
Yeah, and especially for most recently, some of our trained models, it's becoming more important to just share the weights and share those sorts of things too.
You can't just share the code to train the thing if people don't have the compute to actually train them themselves.
So it's kind of growing to not just sharing your data, not just sharing your code,
but you need to share the key derivatives of the preprocessing and those sorts of things.
Or even just sharing the version numbers, because there's been the psychology or fMRI literature.
There's like a bug in some version that made a lot of the results null.
so you know one person could use version 3.7 of a package but that had a bug but people don't know
that right so they claim it's not reproducible but it's really just not the same algorithms yeah
yeah yeah or like across languages like if you rerun the same analysis in matlab versus python
versus r especially complex ones there's a lot of little design decisions under the hood
that might tweak, you know,
exactly how that regression fits
or exactly how that, you know,
if you're statistically sampling,
how the sampling works under the hood of those.
Sure.
Awesome.
Are you familiar with the Journal of Open Source Software?
Yeah.
I had the folks on from there.
Yeah, I had them on quite a while ago.
And I think they're trying to solve
an interesting problem of
if you take the time to create a really nice package for your area,
you might have not taken your time writing the paper.
And so you wouldn't get credit because you don't have as many papers to
publish. So they let you publish like your open source work there,
which I think is, is pretty cool.
Yeah. We think about that.
Yeah. We kind of had that same problem.
One of the, I run a nonprofit called continual AI.
does artificial intelligence and outreach and research, and we have conferences and all sorts
of events. But one of the main things we've done is we built a deep learning library on top of
PyTorch called Avalanche. And so we had a really great community of mostly volunteers who just
saw the need in the field and put it together. But then again, it's like a lot of us are academics,
how do you present this and so you write wrapper papers around kind of the framework um
so that's kind of been the de facto way of like it's not really a paper but you still need to like
you know share it and get credit for it and put your name on it yeah um so yeah it it's certainly
an issue and it's i'm starting to see it not even just with software but even with hardware because
Hardware is becoming more open source in our field.
So you just kind of write like a paper
about the hardware solution to some problem.
That's cool.
It's better than a patent.
Yeah, it's definitely better than a patent.
Patents, while they serve a purpose, are pretty evil.
Let's wrap things up with maybe just,
you mentioned continual AI.
Tell people a bit about that.
Yeah, so it's the largest nonprofit for continual learning.
Continual learning in a nutshell is, say I have a neural network, and I train my neural network to classify cats.
And I classify cats to 90% accuracy, and we're like, yeah, this is why neural networks are great.
I take that same trained neural network on cats, and I train it on, say, dogs.
It does really well.
90% accuracy on dogs.
we're really excited why neural networks are so great but the issue is if i take that again the
same network i just trained it on dogs and previously trained it on cats i try and test it
on cats again it's gonna forget pretty much everything it learned about cats and this is an
old old problem back in like you know the good old days when neural networks were connectionist
models and yeah yeah yeah computer scientists it was the cognitive scientists yeah it's like
over over training or something like that right kind of overfitting related yeah it's very similar
catastrophic forgetting they call it the sequential learning problem which is why i'm really interested
in it because i'm really interested in continual learning and sequential memory or in neuroscience
it's called the stability plasticity problem so when do you learn when do you remember
and so over the last since we started the organization in 2018 the field has kind of
exploded just because there's such a need for overcoming this across a lot of use cases.
So like a lot of times you can only see the data once. So the way you solve the problem
generally is you just shuffle in cats and dogs into the same data set and retrain your model.
But now that your own networks are getting bigger and bigger and bigger, retraining is getting
costlier and costlier. You can't just have, you know, you can't train a network on petabytes every
time you want to update it yeah that's even if you have access to the data and you know the storage
to save it and so on and so forth so so clever ways to solve the problem um so we're kind of
around that we have neuroscientists we have computer scientists ai researchers across academia
industry um all that are just a bunch of people really interested in this problem to just come
together and share papers share ideas we just had a conference we sponsor a lot of competitions
um for for people to kind of put forward an idea to some problem that we kind of put out
every year um so it's been really really exciting to kind of see the community grow over the years
and yeah all the tools and fun things that's kind of come out well it's definitely a hot topic right
now you know i know the cognitive scientists and neuroscientists studied neural networks and stuff
and it was kind of like well maybe this model stuff and then now we're in the time of llms and
the world has gone crazy absolutely so i guess i said we're close out with a continual ai but let's
let me just ask you know what are your thoughts on llms where the stuff's going i mean we all have
exposure to it in different ways but you you've got this understanding of what they're trying to
model it on quite a bit so you know what do you guys in your space think of it so and i was um
so the first lab i joined was a uh well the first real lab i joined was a neuroscience lab where we
were sticking wires in brains and actually doing real neuroscience but i also started kind of
simultaneously working with a cognitive scientist where we were working on the original word to
VEC. So this is, in my mind, like the grandfather of the L-O-L-N. So this is the model that like
overnight took Google Translate from being meh to pretty good. It's just really at the heart of it,
just an autoencoder. But we were really excited then doing kind of semantic modeling of just how
how much further kind of deep learning could take language modeling. And then we were actually using
it to study catastrophe for forgetting. So does Word2Vet catastrophically forget? And the punchline
is it does. And that kind of got me jumped into really excited about continual learning and so on.
So I saw kind of that trajectory then, and then kind of stepped out of it for a few years and
talk more deep into, you know, pure neuroscience and artificial intelligence from other angles.
But I'd always been just so fascinated by this idea of like, say you take an AI and it could read
every book or it could read the internet. Like, what would you be able to get? And that was kind
of, you know, in my mind, like, well, seeing Word2Vec try and do the same thing and training
it on my laptop, like, well, you know, it's going to take, it's going to take a minute till we get
there. And I underestimated that drastically. It was like almost no progress, almost no progress.
Wow. What just happened? Right? Yeah, absolutely. And I think it's a testament to statistical
learning more than anything, which is just how much information can you just soak up and put
together in a fancy new way and regurgitate back. I think the next big leap is going to be
adding more cognition to that progress. So adding when an agent has a goal, when an agent kind of
has to break down a series of steps to get to that goal, those kinds of things we don't see as much of.
And that will kind of be the next big push, I think, that'll kind of take all the cool things that LLMs can do now and kind of blow everyone away.
If you could take the internet and put it on a seven gigabyte file, what can that get you?
But what if you could take the internet, put it on a seven gigabyte file, but actually have some sort of logic and direction and the agent itself can actually navigate through its own thoughts?
That's going to take us, I think, right to the borderline of...
Terminator?
Not Terminator.
I'm just kidding.
It won't be Terminator.
No, it won't be Terminator.
It'll be really an intelligence system.
Yeah.
It's going to be super interesting.
You know, you've got all this prompt engineering and these clever ways to kind of get the current LLMs in the right mindset, which is probably a personification.
But you can tell it things like, here, I want you to tell me how to do this.
And I'll come up with some answer.
You can say, I want you to think step by step.
And then all of a sudden, you get a real different type of answer where it pulls out the pieces and it thinks about how it does it.
And I think it's going to be interesting.
You know, it's kind of like,
it feels like kind of that kind of stuff,
but it just, it already knows how to think.
You don't have to give it little weird clues.
Like you're an expert in this
and you're really good at it.
Now I want to ask you a question about,
oh, I'm good at it.
Okay, I'll answer better, you know?
Yeah.
I don't know.
My favorite definition of AI
is it's whatever computers can't do yet.
Yeah.
Because like, you know, 30 years ago,
if we had this conversation,
it'd be like, so what do you think of Deep Blue?
do you think deep blue um that the ai that because for all the chess um can you know think
and is it going to take all our jobs or it's going to be what can watson do is it can take all our
jobs and you know that was solved with tree search which you know undergraduates in their second year
cs class are learning it's just a standard it's search people don't even think of searches what
do we just loaded every possible outcome into the chess thing and the steps and we just try to take
traverse each step and see where it takes us right exactly so i mean there's always going to be a room
to grow but you know from a cognitive science perspective i think something far more interesting
rather you know i think it's cool to see what computers can actually do and i think they can
do a hell of a lot more but i think it's more interesting to kind of ask the more philosophical
question of what does that actually mean for us because every step of the way when we develop
something new in artificial intelligence it tells us something a lot deeper about our own intelligence
too. Back in the 50s and 60s, they thought the chess meant intelligence. And so now we're kind
of seeing with LLMs, if someone just reads a bunch of books and can memorize a bunch of books,
does that mean they're intelligent? Because that's effectively what an LLM can do.
It comes across as intelligent, right? It comes across that way to people like,
oh, you have all the answers, but it doesn't mean you're good at problem solving necessarily.
Exactly. And so I think we're kind of peeling at this onion and we're kind of segmenting
into its different categories to really kind of break it apart just from this vague word of
intelligence into actually what are the parts that make something intelligent? What does it really
mean? And what are still the things that like we thought were hard and are really easy or the things
that we thought were easy and really hard? Because any LLM you have now can't chew gum and walk to
the store and buy you something to eat and then play you in chess. And so the general and general
AI isn't just there for, you know, to make it sound grander. It's there because that's actually
something that makes humans very, very unique is that I can have this conversation with you,
write code, you know, prepare an omelet, walk a dog, and do all of these things all at once.
And I started as a baby.
Yeah.
And have feelings and thoughts and introspection about it and all that.
Yeah, hopes, dreams, like ketchup and not tomatoes and all sorts of other things.
Yeah.
Yeah, super interesting.
So are you pretty positive on where stuff's going?
Oh, yeah, absolutely.
Yeah.
I think I'm less concerned about the AI itself,
and I'm more concerned about just how we react to it
And if we react intelligent, we react well.
We went through the Industrial Revolution.
We went through the Steel Age.
We're starting to go through the cognitive revolution
or whatever people are going to call this 100 years ago.
I think by and large, people are going to be okay.
I think we just need to have good policies,
make sure that people do it responsibly,
people do it well.
And that's going to be the hard part
is just how do we manage the transition well?
How do we take a whole labor force whose jobs will be gone?
There's no economic incentive to keep their jobs and retrain them in a really smart and sensible way
so people's livelihoods don't just go away to maximize the dollar.
Those are kind of problems that are going to need good policy and clever solutions
and a lot of research to actually sit down and handle well.
But AI isn't going to go anywhere, just like computers haven't went anywhere.
But it's not Terminator that we should worry about.
No, absolutely. It's certainly not. I was joking.
We should worry about disinformation.
And politics and news.
I don't know. I think people get so hung up on all the negatives that we kind of forget.
We're developing these tools for a reason.
Scientists are spending so much time and we're excited about them for a reason.
One being that I used to work on proteins, trying to find the structure of proteins.
And that was one protein a year.
It would take one year to find the structure of protein.
And now I took the same sequence that we found and ran it through AlphaFold, which is DeepMind's protein folding software.
And I could do it in five minutes.
I mean, those are the things that will really catalyze science and technology and health care and actually solve the problems we want to solve.
So that's what energy sources.
I think I heard even some AI stuff coming up with some new battery chemistry,
potentially.
Everything.
How do you appropriately kind of harness like a fusion ring and like a
reactor or something like that?
Everything, even to how do you route a PCB,
like millions of traces effectively.
So it's a tool for the mind and it's not going to,
of put our minds out of work like you said a long time ago when you were in your eye tracking lab
yeah exactly it's like a different view of that thing yeah exactly the same reason that none of
us want to sit around and churn butter and go till the fields and walk to work i don't dislike my
my clothes washer not at all yeah yeah awesome all right well thanks for giving us a look inside
your lab inside your research and the field and then just you know sharing share what you button
It's been great.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
Thanks for having me.
Yeah, it's been really great to,
at least for the years that I've been in research,
seeing how pivotal Python has been.
And I think that's one of the big things
that probably goes unnoticed by a lot of developers
when they're actually writing their code
to solve whatever problem they're solving,
is that, I mean,
someone who's wrote the NumPy library
or the scikit-learn library
or, you know, Jupyter Notebooks has actively played a part in curing diseases and making
people's lives better. And those stories usually don't kind of come to the forefront.
Yeah, it's not a direct line, right? But the research was done and facilitated by these
open source tools and then, you know, discoveries.
Yeah. But like we said, that's the difference between people getting cured in 10 years or
getting cured in a year and that's thousands of lives. And so you might not think about it when
you're sitting behind your desk, you know, making something usable and, but for every day, a PhD
student doesn't have to like pull their hair out and debug some software when it's well-written
and it works well, that's a day that they can find something new. That's awesome. Yeah.
Very inspiring. Let's leave it there, Keelan. Thank you for being on the show.
Yeah. It's been great to talk to you. Thanks for coming. Yeah. Thanks for coming.